docs: add Camunda 8.8+ platform architecture page (#8590)
camunda/camunda-docs: docs/self-managed/reference-architecture/platform-architecture.md

---
id: platform-architecture
title: "Platform architecture"
sidebar_label: "Platform architecture"
description: "A component-level view of Camunda 8.8+ showing how the Orchestration Cluster, Management Cluster, clients, connectors, identity providers, and storage systems connect at runtime."
---

This page describes the runtime architecture of Camunda 8.8+: what the major components are, how they communicate, and which external systems they depend on.

> ![Camunda 8.8+ platform architecture](./img/architecture-8.8-plus.jpg)

Reviewer: Per our conventions, diagrams should:
1. Be sourced from the shared Miro board (as @leiicamundi mentioned)
2. Include a `<!-- Source: https://miro.com/app/board/... -->` comment above the image reference

See `reference-architecture.md` for an example of this pattern.

> ## Two-cluster model

Reviewer: "Two-cluster model" and "Management Cluster" are not established terms in our docs. The existing overview page (`reference-architecture.md`) deliberately uses "Web Modeler and Console" rather than "Management Cluster", and the `camunda/README.md` treats Console, Web Modeler, and Management Identity as separate components — not a "cluster".

Introducing a new architectural term without alignment across the docs will create inconsistency. Consider using the established naming.

| Cluster                                         | Purpose                                                                  |
| ----------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| [Orchestration Cluster](#orchestration-cluster) | Process execution, task management, monitoring, and authorization.       |
| [Management Cluster](#management-cluster)       | Process design (Web Modeler) and multi-cluster administration (Console). |

The clusters communicate via the Camunda API and share an [identity provider](#identity-provider) for authentication, but they are deployed and scaled independently.

---

## Orchestration Cluster

The Orchestration Cluster is the runtime core of Camunda 8. Since 8.8 it ships as a single deployable artifact containing:

- **[Zeebe](/components/zeebe/technical-concepts/architecture.md)** — distributed workflow and decision engine.
- **[Operate](/components/operate/operate-introduction.md)** — process monitoring and incident management UI.
- **[Tasklist](/components/tasklist/introduction-to-tasklist.md)** — user task assignment and completion UI.

> - **Identity** — embedded authorization service for all cluster APIs and UIs.

Reviewer: This should be **Admin**, not **Identity**.

Since 8.8, the embedded Orchestration Cluster component is officially called Admin (see [`orchestration-cluster/admin/overview.md`](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/blob/main/docs/self-managed/components/orchestration-cluster/admin/overview.md): *"Admin (formerly Orchestration Cluster Identity)"*).

Using "Identity" here creates confusion with Management Identity, which is a separate component. The existing overview page (`reference-architecture.md`) already uses the correct term.

```suggestion
- **[Admin](/self-managed/components/orchestration-cluster/admin/overview.md)** — embedded authorization service for all cluster APIs and UIs.
```

The Management Cluster persists its own data in **PostgreSQL** (Web Modeler state, identity records).

:::note Identity separation
The Management Cluster uses its own Identity deployment (previously called Management Identity). This is separate from and incompatible with the embedded Identity in the Orchestration Cluster. Optimize and Web Modeler connect to the Management Cluster Identity; Operate and Tasklist connect to the Orchestration Cluster Identity.
:::

---

## Clients

Client libraries embed in application code to interact with the Orchestration Cluster via the Camunda API:

| Client                                                      | Language                   | Job worker support      |
| ----------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| [Java SDK](/apis-tools/java-client/getting-started.md)      | Java                       | Yes (job push and pull) |
| [TypeScript SDK](/apis-tools/typescript/camunda8-sdk.md)    | JavaScript / TypeScript    | Yes (job push and pull) |

> | [Go client](/apis-tools/community-clients/index.md)         | Go                         | Yes (job push and pull) |

Reviewer: The Go client is **community-maintained** (the link points to `/community-clients/`), but it is presented at the same level as Java SDK and TypeScript SDK which are officially maintained by Camunda.

Consider either:
- Adding a "Support" column (Official / Community)
- Or separating the table into official vs community

Also: the [Spring Boot Starter](/apis-tools/camunda-spring-boot-starter/getting-started.md) is missing — it is officially supported and arguably the most common Java integration path.

---

## Secondary storage

Exporters write all indexed data from the Orchestration Cluster to a secondary storage backend. Operate, Tasklist, and the REST Query API read exclusively from this store (eventually consistent). See [Configuring secondary storage](/self-managed/concepts/secondary-storage/index.md) for setup details.

| Backend                                   | Notes                                                                               |
| ----------------------------------------- | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Elasticsearch**                         | Default for most deployments. Supports ILM for automated data lifecycle management. |
| **OpenSearch**                            | Alternative to Elasticsearch. Supports ISM policies.                                |
| **RDBMS** (PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, …) | SQL-based deployments, enabled via the RDBMS Exporter.                              |

Only one backend is active per Orchestration Cluster.

---

## Object storage

Cluster backups are written to object storage, decoupled from the cluster itself:

> - **Amazon S3** (and S3-compatible stores).

Reviewer: Missing **GCS (Google Cloud Storage)** and **local filesystem**.

The source code (`zeebe/backup-stores/`) supports 4 backends: S3, GCS, Azure, and filesystem. The [backup docs](https://github.com/camunda/camunda-docs/blob/main/docs/self-managed/operational-guides/backup-restore/zeebe-backup-and-restore.md) explicitly list all four.

```suggestion
- **Amazon S3** (and S3-compatible stores).
- **Google Cloud Storage (GCS)**.
- **Azure Blob Storage**.
- **Local filesystem** (for development/testing).
```

---
id: platform-architecture
title: "Platform architecture"
sidebar_label: "Platform architecture"
description: "A component-level view of Camunda 8.8+ showing how the Orchestration Cluster, Management Cluster, clients, connectors, identity providers, and storage systems connect at runtime."
---

This page describes the runtime architecture of Camunda 8.8+: what the major components are, how they communicate, and which external systems they depend on.

> ![Camunda 8.8+ platform architecture](./img/architecture-8.8-plus.jpg)

Reviewer: Could you align the diagram design / source with the common miro board we use: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVL-6SrPc=/?moveToWidget=3458764665925646069&cot=14

It will help for future maintenance / editions (we also put the link of the diagram board in comment)

:::

---

## Clients

Client libraries embed in application code to interact with the Orchestration Cluster via the Camunda API:

| Client | Language | Job worker support |
|---|---|---|
| [Java SDK](/apis-tools/java-client/index.md) | Java | Yes (job push and pull) |
| Node.js SDK | JavaScript / TypeScript | Yes (job push and pull) |
| Go client | Go | Yes (job push and pull) |
| Community clients | Python, .NET, Rust, others | Varies |

**Job workers** are the primary pattern for executing business logic: the worker polls or receives pushed jobs, runs application logic, then completes or fails the job. Workers and the Orchestration Cluster scale independently.

For the full API reference, see [APIs and tools](/apis-tools/working-with-apis-tools.md).

---

## Connectors

Connectors are pre-built integration components that run alongside the Orchestration Cluster and connect processes to external systems without custom code:

> - **Outbound Connectors** — trigger actions in external systems (HTTP, Kafka, AWS services, Slack, and hundreds more via Camunda Marketplace).

Reviewer: could we add a link to the full list of connectors?

- **Inbound Connectors** — receive events from external systems and correlate them into running processes.

Connectors interact with the Orchestration Cluster through the Camunda API, the same path as any other client.

See [Introduction to Connectors](/components/connectors/introduction.md).

---

## Identity provider

Both clusters delegate authentication to an external **OIDC/OAuth2 identity provider**:

> - **Keycloak** — the default bundled provider for self-managed deployments.

Reviewer: Same remark, we are introducing duplication of what the components supports. also, I have the feeling that it's not accurate. Self Managed deployments do not deploy keycloak anymore and Auth0 is a product - most of the time we do refer to OIDC Identity provider.

My suggestion here is to keep the details in the other page and only keeping the description as light as possible

- **Auth0** and other OIDC-compatible providers — supported for both clusters.

The embedded Identity component in the Orchestration Cluster acts as the **authorization enforcement layer** (defining what authenticated users may do), while the external provider handles **token issuance and validation**.

---

## Secondary storage

Exporters write all indexed data from the Orchestration Cluster to a secondary storage backend. Operate, Tasklist, and the REST Query API read exclusively from this store (eventually consistent):

| Backend | Notes |
|---|---|
| **Elasticsearch** | Default for most deployments. Supports ILM for automated data lifecycle management. |
| **OpenSearch** | Alternative to Elasticsearch. Supports ISM policies. |
| **RDBMS** (PostgreSQL, MySQL, MariaDB, …) | SQL-based deployments, enabled via the RDBMS Exporter. |

> Only one backend is active per Orchestration Cluster. Optimize can share the same Elasticsearch or OpenSearch instance.

Reviewer: Ordering:

We are describing secondary storage - Optimize is introduced later. The order will create confusion as the reader may not be away of what is Optimize at this stage of reading

---

## Object storage

> Cluster backups are written to object storage, decoupled from the cluster itself:

Reviewer: I have the feeling that this part should redirect to a dedicated guide related to the backup, otherwise we do duplicate information and in the long term, it may become obsolote.

> - **Amazon S3** (and S3-compatible stores such as MinIO).

Reviewer: MinIO is not opensource anymore, please remove it - S3-compatible stores is sufficient here

- **Azure Blob Storage**.

Backups are initiated via the [Management API](#management-api) and stored independently of primary and secondary storage.

---

## Optimize

> Optimize is an analytics component deployed separately from the Orchestration Cluster. It reads historical execution data from the shared secondary storage (Elasticsearch or OpenSearch) to produce reports, dashboards, and KPI alerts.

Reviewer: Same as above, I have the feeling that the reader should source details of what is supported as secondary storage (ES/OS) directly in the "What is Optimize page)
